Scalability docs (#2653)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/scalability/sharded-property-databases/overview.adoc

Please note that any cases related to the Preview feature will be classified as Severity 4 by default, in accordance with the link:https://neo4j.com/terms/support-terms/[Support Terms].
====

== What is property sharding?

Property sharding is about decoupling the properties associated with nodes and relationships, and storing them in separate graphs.
The graph structure, comprising nodes and relationships, is stored in a single "graph shard".
The properties associated with these nodes and relationships are distributed across multiple "property shards".
This architecture enables the independent scaling of property data, allowing for the handling of larger volumes of properties without impacting the performance of the graph structure. +
At the same time, it also allows for the optimization of storage for graph data, as the graph shards are designed to store more graph-centric information without the overhead of properties. +
The sharded property database behaves like a standard database.
It provides ACID guarantees for write transactions and full API support, i.e., Cypher language queries, driver's API, and Neo4j Java internal API.

> image::scalability/sharded-architecture.svg[title="High-level sketch of property sharding.", role="middle"]

Reviewer: Can we use `foo-sharded` as the db name since we use that in subsequent sections?

:page-role: new-2025.10 enterprise-edition not-on-aura
:description: This page describes property sharding and how it works.
= Overview

.Preview Feature
[IMPORTANT]
====
The *property sharding feature is offered AS-IS* as described in your agreement with Neo4j and should only be used for internal development purposes.

When this feature becomes generally available, you will need to upgrade to the latest Neo4j version (which may require downtime) to use the feature for non-development purposes.

*Enabling the preview feature (internal parameter):* +
By default, the sharded property database is disabled.
Use the internal setting `internal.dbms.sharded_property_database.enabled=true` to enable it.

> Also, note that sharded property databases require Cypher 25. For details, see xref:configuration/cypher-version-configuration.adoc[Configure the Cypher default version].

Reviewer 2: I would not mention this here. This has nothing to do with the preview notice. This is true even when not in preview and will be true when in GA.

At the same time, it also allows for the optimization of storage for graph data, as the graph shards are designed to store more graph-centric information without the overhead of properties. +
The sharded property database behaves like a standard database.
It provides ACID guarantees for write transactions and full API support, i.e. Cypher language queries, drivers API, and Neo4j Java internal API.

image::scalability/sharded-architecture.png[title="High-level sketch of sharded architecture.", role="middle"]

== How it works

The graph shard contains only nodes and relationships without the properties.
Each shard is simply a Neo4j database with some custom behaviors.

All node and relationship properties are distributed evenly across the property shards using a sharding (hash) function.
Each property shard contains equivalent unconnected nodes and relationships, each of which has the same unique identifier as the one in the graph shard, and stores the properties associated with those elements.
This means that each entity in the graph shard has one and only one corresponding entity in one of the property shards, and that property shard will serve all requests for that entity.

> The entire system is deployed into an autonomous cluster, with the graph shard being a regular Raft group (see xref:clustering/setup/routing.adoc[Leadership, routing, and load balancing]).

Author: We don't use the word autonomous in our documentation.
```suggestion
The entire system is deployed into a Neo4j cluster, with the graph shard being a regular Raft group (see xref:clustering/setup/routing.adoc[Leadership, routing, and load balancing]).
```
